Sign up
Sign in
Sign up
Sign in
Raghav Rastogi
Follow
--
Listen
Share
A more comprehensive way to assess a decision.
Time and again we come across a situation where we need to make a decision that would impact our lives often for the better, however, it comes with a risk element attached to it. This could be anything like switching a job, moving out, going abroad, starting a side hustle, joining a startup, etc. These are huge life-altering decisions and thus they require a complete assessment of the situation which includes your current finances, the current level of comfort, future disruption, fall back plan, and many such factors. But how do we take such huge decisions? Do we chalk out a plan and think rationally or we simply go with what feels right during the moment?
There is a segment of people who is a firm believer in intuition. They “go with the gut” or “they do what feels right”. This approach is not wrong. In fact, from research, it has been proven that we are incapable to decide without having a slight feeling about it, doesn’t matter if it requires a lot of assessment rationally. But need we to understand when is it appropriate to decide rationally and when on intuition completely.
From the book, “How we Decide” — by Jonah Lehrer, it has been researched that intuition is developed by having a consistent observation of something over a huge period of time and it gets tuned even further with the new data of your senses to the brain. So when do we rely on this type of decision? Intuition works best when you have already made a decision on a similar thing earlier and are faced with another decision.
For example, when we order food from outside, we don’t chalk out the list of pros and cons to decide on the type of food we want to eat. We have already made this decision multiple times in our lives and we go ahead what feels right at that moment. This example was simple, but a complex decision based on intuition would require that much more experience and feedback. For instance, people who are highly experienced in sales and will know intuitively if the customer is going to convert or not. If they get it wrong, they would learn from the experience and naturally get better.
Next, we move on to rational decisions. These decisions force us to think more about the situation and make a plan. It becomes extremely difficult to keep all the points in your head. This type of decision is evident when you decide to buy a phone. You at least need to look at the specs, compare them, think about the price and your budget, if you’ll be buying it as a down payment or an EMI. Are there any offers currently? Is the track record of the brand good? and many such factors. If the person has brand loyalty he makes the decision based on intuition as he already has a lot of experience with the device, and he is willing to trust the brand even though the specs have been compromised.
Now that we understand how intuition and rationality works. Let’s understand which one should be utilized to make a life-altering decision. We get these types of situations only a few times over the years. There is no way to mentally assess the complete situation. You must write the possible consequences, weight them, and think about different hypothetical but reasonable situations that might happen. Naturally, intuition fails here. We must rely on our rational capabilities to make a good decision.
Now that we have established that we MUST make a rational decision in these situations. Here comes the tricky part. When we are trying to decide based on the consequences of our action, things like how would it affect my life if I go abroad, will my life improve eventually if I leave the current job, will it backfire, will I regret this decision, etc., we are only focused on one aspect and missing out another huge factor from this equation.
From the Book, “4 Hour Workweek” — Timothy Ferris, he mentions the potential disadvantages of the inaction of a decision. When we postpone or not take an action on the new opportunity, we are in turn deciding to be exactly where we currently are and to continue to live like the current way. This might have huge consequences on its own, even possibly bigger than the cons of taking an action.
I am not asking everyone to take a big risk in life but a ‘calculated one’. You are the best judge for it. All I want to convey is a way to look at the circumstance more holistically. We need to start taking in three factors which are pros and cons when we take the action and the cost of inaction. You would be surprised by how the new opportunity looks even more enticing despite the risks it has. The cost of inaction in many situations would completely out-weigh the cons of taking the action and enable you to take a leap of faith as you will now understand that not taking an action might become more disastrous than taking action.
The new questions that you will now ask yourself will include what would happen if I did not go abroad? Will my life improve if I stay at my current job? Is the regret of not taking an action would disrupt my life later on? I hope this small information broadens the outlook if you’re stuck on a decision and have been pushing it for a long time. This might finally give the courage to take the action now if the cost of inaction is gradually increasing as time passes.
--
--
Data Scientist @ Genentech, San Francisco
Help
Status
About
Careers
Blog
Privacy
Terms
Text to speech
Teams